README.md, before:

amex2qif
========

Convert American Express CSV export files to QIF format.

Several years ago, American Express dropped support for the QIF format for
exporting statements.  However, American Express still supports exporting data
in Comma Separated Value file (CSV) format.   This software allows you to
convert the CSV statement into a QIF file on your local computer.

Usage
-----

Here is how to run this program:

    amex2qif statement.csv > statement.qif

where 'statement.csv' is a CSV statement downloaded from American Express.

This will create the file 'statement.qif' from the CSV file 'statement.csv'.

The program supports several options. Do:

    amex2qif --help
   
to see the supported options


Format of CSV files
-------------------

The program supports multiple formats of CSV files from AMEX.  They are not
explicitly versioned, so you need to figure out which format you need based
on the order of the column headers.

Legacy format versions have all been converted to numbered versions.  You
may use either the older legacy version name or its new number when
providing a value to the --format argument.

The supported CSV format versions are as follows:
```
   old      (0)=>date, ref, payee, card-holder-name, card-number, memo, amount
   new      (1)=>date, payee, card-holder-name, card-holder-number-end, amount
   new2     (2)=>Date, Description, Category, type, Amount
   default  (3)=>date, ref, amount, payee, memo
   (noname) (4)=>Date, Description, Amount, 'Extended Details',
                  'Appears On Your Statement As Address', City/State,
                  'Zip Code', Country, Reference, Category
```

The most recent format, #4, was added based on an AMEX csv download from May 2022


**Regarding some of the legacy formats:**

    In the old-style, the columns are:

        1:Date, 2:Ref?, 3:Payee, 4:Card-holder-name, 5:Card-number, 8:Amount

    It is unclear what AMEX expects to be in columns 6 and 7.

    There is no memo in the old-style CSV files from AMEX.  However if you edit
    the CSV file before coverting to a QIF file, insert a memo in column 6 and the
    it will be added to the memo field in the QIF output for that item.

    In the new-style, the columns are:

        1:Data, 2:Reference, 3:Amount, 4:Payee, 5:Memo

Adding Yet Another Format Version
---------------------------------

It seems AMEX is in the habit of changing the header order / format in
its CSV downloads frequently.  If you would like to add a new one, it is
quite easy to do so.

 *  In formatVersions.py: add a new subclass at the bottom like the others.
    Replace the assignments for each of the variables in the returned tuple
    with the proper directives to obtain the desired values from the row set
 *  Increase the number at the end of the name of your subclass by one to
    make it distinct from the other subclasses.
    e.g. FormatVersion4 => FormatVersion5
 *  In amexcsv2qif, add your new version number (and description) to the
    parser setup in ArgumentParser, parser.add_argument('--format', ...)

Automatic Categorization
------------------------

If you provide a 'categories.txt' file in the same directory in which you
execute the **amex2qif** program or in the directory containing the
**amex2qif** program, it will used to automatically assign categories to
transactions if the payee matches know vendors.

**Format of 'categories.txt'**

Each line should have the vendor name, a comma, and then the category
to be used when the payee matches that vendor.  Empty lines are ignored.  A
default version of this file can be kept in the directory of the **amex2qif**
executable.  If a copy of this file is found in the directory that this ommand
is run in, it overrides the version in the executable directory.

Running on Windows
------------------

TBD... First you must install Python on your windows system.

Disclaimer
----------

This work is not connected to American Express or sponsored by it in any way!

-Jonathan Cameron
 jmcameron@gmail.com

Commit message:

Add warning about obsolescence and reference csv2qif
Added a warning about the obsolescence of this library and referenced the csv2qif library.

README.md, after:

amex2qif
========

WARNING: This is obsolete.  Please see my [`csv2qif`](https://github.com/jmcameron/csv2qif) library.

Convert American Express CSV export files to QIF format.

Several years ago, American Express dropped support for the QIF format for
exporting statements.  However, American Express still supports exporting data
in Comma Separated Value file (CSV) format.   This software allows you to
convert the CSV statement into a QIF file on your local computer.

Usage
-----

Here is how to run this program:

    amex2qif statement.csv > statement.qif

where 'statement.csv' is a CSV statement downloaded from American Express.

This will create the file 'statement.qif' from the CSV file 'statement.csv'.

The program supports several options. Do:

    amex2qif --help
   
to see the supported options


Format of CSV files
-------------------

The program supports multiple formats of CSV files from AMEX.  They are not
explicitly versioned, so you need to figure out which format you need based
on the order of the column headers.

Legacy format versions have all been converted to numbered versions.  You
may use either the older legacy version name or its new number when
providing a value to the --format argument.

The supported CSV format versions are as follows:
```
   old      (0)=>date, ref, payee, card-holder-name, card-number, memo, amount
   new      (1)=>date, payee, card-holder-name, card-holder-number-end, amount
   new2     (2)=>Date, Description, Category, type, Amount
   default  (3)=>date, ref, amount, payee, memo
   (noname) (4)=>Date, Description, Amount, 'Extended Details',
                  'Appears On Your Statement As Address', City/State,
                  'Zip Code', Country, Reference, Category
```

The most recent format, #4, was added based on an AMEX csv download from May 2022


**Regarding some of the legacy formats:**

    In the old-style, the columns are:

        1:Date, 2:Ref?, 3:Payee, 4:Card-holder-name, 5:Card-number, 8:Amount

    It is unclear what AMEX expects to be in columns 6 and 7.

    There is no memo in the old-style CSV files from AMEX.  However if you edit
    the CSV file before coverting to a QIF file, insert a memo in column 6 and the
    it will be added to the memo field in the QIF output for that item.

    In the new-style, the columns are:

        1:Data, 2:Reference, 3:Amount, 4:Payee, 5:Memo

Adding Yet Another Format Version
---------------------------------

It seems AMEX is in the habit of changing the header order / format in
its CSV downloads frequently.  If you would like to add a new one, it is
quite easy to do so.

 *  In formatVersions.py: add a new subclass at the bottom like the others.
    Replace the assignments for each of the variables in the returned tuple
    with the proper directives to obtain the desired values from the row set
 *  Increase the number at the end of the name of your subclass by one to
    make it distinct from the other subclasses.
    e.g. FormatVersion4 => FormatVersion5
 *  In amexcsv2qif, add your new version number (and description) to the
    parser setup in ArgumentParser, parser.add_argument('--format', ...)

Automatic Categorization
------------------------

If you provide a 'categories.txt' file in the same directory in which you
execute the **amex2qif** program or in the directory containing the
**amex2qif** program, it will used to automatically assign categories to
transactions if the payee matches know vendors.

**Format of 'categories.txt'**

Each line should have the vendor name, a comma, and then the category
to be used when the payee matches that vendor.  Empty lines are ignored.  A
default version of this file can be kept in the directory of the **amex2qif**
executable.  If a copy of this file is found in the directory that this ommand
is run in, it overrides the version in the executable directory.

Running on Windows
------------------

TBD... First you must install Python on your windows system.

Disclaimer
----------

This work is not connected to American Express or sponsored by it in any way!

-Jonathan Cameron
 jmcameron@gmail.com
